>> Hey Internet, hey everyone.
>> Hi, Michael, how are you?
>> Hey, it's so good to have you here.
Thank you everyone watching live on YouTube.
If you got comments, thoughts, feedback, please put it into the live comments.
We'll try to make it part of the show.
And with that, let's kick off the podcast.
Brett, Jay, Tanya, Emily, Paul, and Gina welcome all of you to Talk by Theta Mi.
>> Thanks, Michael.
- Hey everyone.
- Hey.
- Hello.
It's really great to have you here.
I'm super excited to have a conversation
around the whole community of Python survey results.
You know, thank you to the PSF and JetBrains
for putting the survey together.
Thank you all for being here.
And I wanna invite a bunch of you
so that we could have a bunch of different perspectives
and thoughts and ideas on where we are.
So that's gonna be so much fun,
But let's do a quick round of introductions.
Brett, open source contributor extraordinaire.
- So my name is Brett Cannon.
I'm in charge of the Python experience for VS Code.
I'm also a core developer for 19 years now,
a member of the Python steering council since its founding.
And I'm calling from Vancouver on the unceded territory
of the Squamish Musqueam and Tsleil-Waututh First Nations.
- All right, great to have you here.
Thanks for all the Python things you've done.
Jay.
- Yeah, I'm Jay Miller.
I'm a senior cloud advocate at Microsoft.
I work with our Python advocates and yeah,
it's my job to keep Brett looking so amazing.
At least talk about the amazing stuff he's done.
- That's right, spread the word.
Tanya.
- Hey everyone, my name is Tanya.
I'm currently a Python developer advocate at DeepGram
while we were an AI speech to text company.
So before I got into Python, I was a professional athlete.
So I'm like a pro athlete, turned,
worked in sales for a little bit
and then got into tech after.
But thanks for having me today.
It's good to be here.
- It's great to have you.
And I love your story 'cause it shows
you don't have to just grow up doing code from a young age
to be really great at this
and how fun it must've been to be a pro athlete.
So cool.
- Thank you.
- Yeah.
Emily, great to have you here.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Hi, I'm Emily.
I am the Director of Engineering
at a software consultancy called CuddleSoft.
I'm also a CPython core developer
and the recovering PyCon US Chair from the last three years.
- Yeah, great work.
It sounded like people I talked to
had a wonderful time there, so good job on PyCon.
Paul, nice to have you back.
- Hi, everybody.
I'm Paul Everett, a developer advocate
JetBrains, a teller of semi-true stories of Python history, and really happy to be with the six of
you. This is a cool panel. >> Yeah, I'm happy to have you here. It is a cool panel. Gina, you were
not too long ago on Python Bytes, as was Tanya as well, but it's great to have you over here on
Talk Python. >> Yeah, thank you for having me. Yeah, so my name is Gina Hueske. I'm the creator
and maintainer of something called Octoprint,
which is the snappy web interface for user 3D printer
and which is written in Python,
which is why I'm here, I guess.
So, hi.
- Hi.
And people who are not watching,
I think you've got just the coolest office setup.
You've got your laser cutter and 3D printer
and stuff that you've created with your makerspace
to set up a really nice camera AV setup.
So it's fantastic.
- And a three-headed monkey.
- And a three-headed monkey, of course.
Right behind me.
(laughing)
- I love it.
All right, well,
Paul, do you wanna maybe say a few things
about the relationship of the PSF and JetBrains
and sort of a little bit of background on the survey
to just maybe introduce it first real quick
since JetBrains was part of it.
If I go and look at the results here,
when we get to them, it's at jetbrains.com,
but it's not really a JetBrains survey, is it?
- No, not at all.
It's interesting when I was doing the prep for this,
I was like, how far back does this go?
Damn, this thing goes back to 2016.
Wow.
Which is interesting to see some changes over time.
But this was kind of a brainchild back then
of we got a need, Python has a need, let's do it together.
But then it kind of turned into PSF steering the ship
and JetBrains just doing what it was told
for conducting the survey, doing a little bit
of throwing smart brains at it from our research folks
to do statistical validity, trying to add new questions
but preserve old ones so that we could see trends over time.
So this is now the PSF survey.
And I think that's a great resource
'cause we all have these questions, right?
- Yeah, yeah, we absolutely do.
And one of the things I remember when I was reading
about it is it wasn't conducted on the JetBrains site.
This was on python.org, right?
- Yeah, it's hard because it can feel like,
well, it becomes a selection bias
because it's affiliated with JetBrains.
And so over the years, we've really tried to turn this
into kind of a contribution to the community
and let the PSF kind of dictate what it wants to see
and how things should be organized and conducted.
- Yeah, yeah.
Brett or Emily, anything you wanna add to that
since you're a little bit on the inside?
- No, I mean, Paul nailed it on the head.
It's a great partnership between the PSF and JetBrains.
Like, as I said, it's mainly questions coming
from the PSF and the JetBrains.
Folk happen to help do it, make the spiffy website
with the awesome cookie policy pop up in the corner.
I still think you all have the best one in the industry.
- Yes, you could type in it.
It's a console, right?
- Yeah, that's pretty cool.
But yeah, like we can talk about it later,
but like the development residents questions, for instance,
all came straight from Lukasz.
and they specifically asked Lukasz
to come up with those and such.
So it's great collaboration.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Cool.
All right, I'm gonna pull this up here
and for folks who want to check it out,
obviously there's not gonna be probably
that many links in the show notes,
but there's the one, the one important one,
which is the Python developer survey 2021 results.
So one thing to keep in mind as we talk about this
is it's a bit of a historical look a little bit.
So this was conducted in the fall of 2021
and here we are in the summer of 2022.
So, you know, for example,
there's questions about Python 3.10, right?
I'm sure the adoption is higher of that now than it was.
What is that?
Eight months, seven months ago, something like that.
So keep that in mind.
And
So yeah, what do we want to say?
It actually links back to the previous results as well,
which is really good.
It went through a bunch of different areas.
And so I think the first--
we're just going to go through it in order
and maybe skip some that are not maybe too detailed or something.
But the first one is, are you a Python developer?
Or are you a developer that also happens to use Python?
And for the people who took the survey,
granted they are going to python.org to see this
or they were encouraged on Twitter from Python people
to go take the survey.
And it's 84% of the people are using Python
as their main language.
I personally think that's pretty high.
I think that's a pretty positive number here.
What do you all think?
- I'd be curious what the bias is.
Like I wonder what would happen
if this made it in front of Hacker News
and what this number would then be.
'Cause for instance, I know plenty of people
who complain at me at work about,
why is this Python stuff kicking up?
I only use this script every two months kind of thing.
So I know lots of ancillary uses of Python
all over the world.
So I'd be really curious.
Obviously this does not really represent the world itself.
So I think it just at least helps set a guideline
as it is, as it were,
as to how to view these results more than an actual number
we can rely on for the overall computing world.
- Yeah, I think it's interesting
because if I remember correctly,
this question was sort of a self selection
of how you identify.
So I definitely say like, yeah, I am a Python developer,
but if I am realistic about the actual code
that I'm writing on a daily basis,
I'm definitely not like primarily writing Python.
So I think that this really sort of frames
the perspective of the person filling out the survey
to say like, yes, Python is my main language of choice
in whatever way that might be,
but it might not actually be the thing
that they're writing the most code for.
- Sure.
I'd like to hear your thoughts of this from everyone,
but my view of the Python world
is it basically breaks into three pieces.
We've got the web developer, web API sort of folks.
We've got the data scientists
and we have this massive other, you know, scientists,
economists, you know, maker folks,
programming little devices.
And it seems to me that the first two,
the web and the data science
would probably really be the main, right?
They would just live in Python, but that other group,
they might drop into Python to just,
oh, I heard there's this library
and it'll give me this picture that I need,
and then go back to whatever they were doing,
something like that.
And Tanya, what do you think?
Sorry, Brad, didn't mean to cut you off.
- Yeah, yeah, I guess too,
like I was, that actually made me think about like,
like when you were collecting the survey results
for this one, like what levels,
like did you ask like what level they were at?
Like, were they more junior, senior, mid-level?
I feel like maybe someone maybe just starting out in Python,
you know, maybe that's like their own,
like their main language that they're using
versus someone who's more senior or more experienced.
Maybe they were using, you know,
secondary languages as well.
- Yeah.
That's a very good observation.
There's a section on the, how junior or senior people are,
which I think is pretty interesting.
Jay, you're, you've been doing some of the
developer relationship stuff, you probably got to think about this sort of breakdown
a lot.
What are your thoughts?
I do.
And my history comes from being a tinker/automator.
So often I had to use whatever tools I was told to use and find ways to inject Python
into it.
So what I'm glad to see is now, I mean, I think that's the case for most people.
Like you said, that is that bubble that the Python community is vastly growing in of people
who are, "I'm using Python to do this thing in my job that isn't as a developer."
And it's nice to see that I think more and more use cases of Python are becoming available
so that I don't have to go reach for whatever the parent language is in my project.
I can go and just use Python for most things.
I think that while a part of this is,
we're looking at this dataset as people who love Python,
wanting to come in and talk about Python
and share their thoughts and feelings about it.
But I also recognize that had you asked me
this very question three years ago,
I would have had to given a different answer.
Yeah, I think that it's great that that number can go up
because of the growth of Python from a technical standpoint.
Yeah, great point. Gina? Yeah, that pretty much mirrors what I was about to say
because when I started with Python, when I got the first time into touch with it,
that must have been sometime around 2007, 2008-ish. So a really long time ago when I
actually was still a system administrator at university in the
computer science department and I used Python to automate some stuff like
maintenance things and bookkeeping and whatnot.
So I distinctly remember writing a label tool
for the backup drives.
And back then, if you had asked me this question,
I would certainly not have said I'm a Python programmer.
And I'm not even sure I would have said
that Python is my secondary language
because it would probably rather have been my tertiary
or whatever the word is for fourth or fifth.
(laughing)
And even 10 years ago,
I would still have identified as a Java developer
with maybe a bit of background in Python
and a lot of JavaScript, HTML, CSS and Bash stuff thrown in.
But these days, yeah, I've also moved to someone
who would call themselves a Python developer.
And I kind of find it funny that apparently
many more people have made the same transition
over the years.
And that is kind of amazing to see.
- Yeah, there's definitely a large influx
of people moving in.
So related to that, you said you had done Java
and actually right now I'm working on Dart.
I'm trying to maybe do some Flutter mobile app stuff
to augment our courses and whatnot.
And there's, you know, it's,
Tanya had a great point where she said,
you know, the more junior you are,
you might just be learning one language now,
but then as you grow, you're like,
well, I really need to learn this other language
to do this thing.
So the next question was,
Well, what are you using in addition to your Python code,
regardless of whether it's your primary or second,
are you doing JavaScript, doing HTML,
are you doing C# or Rust or Go?
And I think these questions are,
they're always really hard to pick because for example,
HTML and CSS, that seemed like a valid question,
but on the other hand,
it's not really a standalone programming language.
Like no one would introduce themselves like,
hey, I'm Michael, I'm a CSS developer,
full stack by the way.
So should it really be a thing that pairs with that or not?
It's a tricky for me to decide,
but for that question,
the most paired up language is JavaScript
and then HTML and CSS.
And then we've got, sort of to Gina's point,
Bash or Shell scripting and SQL.
But I guess if you look at programming languages,
we probably have JavaScript and then C++
and then Java and then C#.
Yeah, this is pretty interesting what people pair it with.
I think you gotta,
I talked about the third of sort of web developer side
that clearly is the 40, 30% of JavaScript and HTML.
And then I think it gets pretty interesting.
What stands out to everyone here?
- I think this kind of suggests it might be a third cohort
after the web and data science of,
and it's kind of was suggested by like,
I think Gina and Jay earlier of automation, right?
Where I think the folks who work with like Ansible
and Chef and Salt and use Python to basically do the DevOps,
IT admin things, probably are a third cohort
and may not quite view themselves as Python developers,
even though they are, right?
And I think this kind of plays into that
with the whole JavaScript, HTML, CSS covering that web group
and then patch shell covering that cohort
and then SQL kind of cross cuts across web and data science.
So I think it kind of is interesting.
I also personally hope the C++ group drops
'cause people write more Python and less C and C++
with all the performance coming in Python 3.11
in the future, but that's just a personal wish.
- Yeah, Paul, you're pumping your fist there
some C++ being overtaken by more Python.
I will start by giving the first of 20 consecutive compliments to Brett,
who is reviewing WebAssembly pull requests,
probably as we speak, he's got two or three other Bretts back in the back
that are doing the pull request reviews.
But as WebAssembly becomes a thing,
then maybe Brett's mission to demolish C# will take effect.
I'll take exception to the HTML ain't a language.
The L language. Come on.
Give it some love.
And Stack Overflow says it's the number one language.
So maybe the only thing I'll add that was interesting to me on this
is seeing the change since 2016, because this is a question
that's been asked every time.
Fairly stable wording on it hasn't changed that much.
The top five are the top five.
SQL has bounced around.
If I remember correctly, last year,
it was number one ahead of JavaScript at 43%
or something like that.
And I kind of thought, well, that's data science kicking in,
but then this year it took a little bit of a drop.
- Question about the makeup of this language.
Was this a kind of a multiple choice thing
or did you have to, okay,
so you could say JavaScript, HTML, Bash.
I remember taking the survey,
but I cannot remember the question format.
Yeah, yeah, Gina, the little giveaway is that there's this 100 plus at the top,
which means like people can pick more than one.
Ah, okay, okay, okay.
When you see that at the top of my section.
Anonymized, cleaned up data sets are available for all you smart people who can do cross tabs.
If they want to do SQL against their team, it's CSV. Sorry, go ahead.
No, that's okay. I was just saying, I was going to say like,
I have tried to escape JavaScript for a while now.
I just feel like I'm not able to escape it.
It's like, you know, I have, you know,
- There is no escape.
- There is no escape from JavaScript.
- I've just given up.
- Yeah.
I was curious to see though, how, you know,
like as the development of, you know, PyScript,
as it develops, like if that JavaScript number
will stay the same,
or if it's gonna like kind of drop off a little bit.
And then, I mean, I know Bootstrap isn't a language,
it's more of a front end framework,
but I'm, you know, I, this kind of made me curious,
you know, like are Python developers using Bootstrap
more with their applications or are they using straight JavaScript? Are they using,
you know, vanilla HTML and CSS?
- I could imagine that React is pretty much featuring very highly there and maybe
also Angular and Vue.js as well, which is also how I explained that maybe
JavaScript is actually ranked up higher than HTML and CSS because if you write
React in these days, you pretty much only interact with JavaScript code and you
might throw snippets of stuff in there that looks like HTML,
but actually isn't.
And so people in that case would probably more identify
as the JavaScript crowd or maybe the TypeScript crowd.
So yeah.
- Dina, do you use a lot of other languages
or technologies for your devices
and embedded things and so on?
- I used to have this thing that I try to learn
a new language every other year or so,
but then life happened and I haven't been up to that
for the last, I don't know, 13 years or so now.
But I can say that in my day to day,
I probably mostly use Python, JavaScript,
Bash as well a lot.
No Java anymore, thankfully.
SQL here and there maybe as well.
But I think that is about that.
I mean, sometimes I also have to touch C or C++ code,
but I try to really avoid it because I know my weaknesses
are pointer arithmetics and forgetting to free up memory.
So I stay away from languages that allow
to shoot myself in the foot too much.
- Yeah, even if you're good at it,
it's just, it's a hassle if you can avoid it.
Final thought on this one, Emily,
you said you were doing other languages as well.
One being a core developer, C++ is probably something
that you've got to mess with, or C rather, being CPython.
But what stands out to you here?
- Yeah, I think that most of my contributions to CPython
have been C and not Python.
Yeah, I think it's interesting.
I think it's very clear that web development
is very much at the forefront.
I think being able to sort of ingest this data
and make meaning of it does get really difficult
because you look at HTML, CSS,
and there's so many different ways that it can be used.
So it's like, oh, like, are these people writing Django
or Flask applications, and they're also including that,
Or do they happen to be writing a React front end
and are considering it in there?
So I do think that that's interesting
and just sort of a difficult thing
to really like take that meaning out of it.
But I think it's very clear that
there is some section of people who
are still looking for things that are more similar
to Python elsewhere, right?
So you can't get away from JavaScript as we all know.
There's really not a good substitution for something
like HTML, CSS, if that's what you're building.
But you see things in here where there's Go, there's Rust,
things that people might be leaning towards when
they need something that's a bit more performant
or filling a different need for them.
So I think it's interesting that those are still
making a meaningful enough impact that they're
making this list.
And I think it will be interesting to see
how this changes over the next few years with improvements
the Python performance, so.
- For sure, yeah, good point.
The one, it's hard to tell from these little graphs
that shows year over year change,
and the one that seems to have grown the most is Rust,
and I feel like there's a lot of people
starting to pair Rust with Python
instead of C with Python for some of those internals.
Pretty interesting, okay.
Languages for web and data science,
they break this stuff all down.
I'm gonna skip over this one,
And so this next question here asks,
Python usage as a main or secondary language
for a certain purpose?
So maybe we could touch on top four or five here.
So data analytics.
Python is the main language, but only by 4%, right?
And then a web development,
it seems like Python is more of the main language
and so on.
But for example, DevOps,
as Gina was sort of talking about,
system administration,
it's a secondary language that people bring in.
So yeah, Tanya, were you gonna jump in there?
- I was just kind of nodding my head
about the data analysis, the 52%,
and just thinking like, what else are they using?
using R instead of Python for data analysis or something else?
Or just kind of made me think of that.
- Yeah, it's a real good question.
I don't know the answer.
Maybe some other folks do.
- For me, coming from--
- What are they using if not the second language?
Go ahead, Jay.
- I don't even think it was necessarily like a language.
I think it was, where is the data coming from
and how do you get into it?
That was one of the things where I've been
a massive advocate for working with public data
and using tools like Socrata that provide REST APIs
for a lot of that data.
But when all of a sudden you're working in a project
and you have a map and the map is only GIS data
and you're like, well, yes, I could.
I could start doing like neonatum stuff
or I could just use what they give me.
And unfortunately, a lot of data like that
is kind of locked into however they decide to give it to you,
albeit sometimes a CSV file that has 2,000 columns to it.
So it's almost terrifying to open up Pandas or open up just
Python import CSV and run with it.
So you just kind of use whatever they've given you to use.
But I'm glad that there are services.
Again, that's going to be my repeating sentiment,
I'm glad that there are more and more things coming out that make using Python with a lot
of these tools a little bit more accessible to beginners and I would say enthusiasts.
I'm not a data analyst.
I'm not a data scientist.
I don't even pretend to be one.
I'm just someone that loves looking at data and says, "What can I discover from it?"
Yeah, very cool.
Gina, how does that DevOps system administration breakdown for you, does that resonate?
Absolutely, because frankly, even though I now consider myself a Python developer,
whenever I have to get into DevOps administration stuff, the first thing that I try to use to solve
any given problem that I have is shell script. Once that reaches a certain level of complexity
and I start to slowly but surely lose my sanity over it,
then I switch it over to Python.
But the first approach is usually just, I don't know,
three or four lines of best script,
and suddenly all ton of logic ends up in it,
then I might need an argument parser at some point,
and then, yeah, then Python starts to look more
attractive at that point.
But if it's really just chaining a bunch of
Unix commands together and throwing JQ
against the JSON dump or something like that,
but then it's just, I don't know,
the shell script is just faster.
- Yeah, no dependencies, it's just right there.
- Yeah, it just works.
Like maybe I have to install one single command line tool
or statically linked even maybe, and then I'm done.
So yeah, when I can do that, I prefer doing that
because then I don't feel like
I have to maintain something now.
- Emily, the one that stands out to me most here
is that the biggest I'm using Python as my primary language
is for web development.
You probably run into a lot of web projects at CuddleSoft.
What are your thoughts on that?
- Yeah, I mean, I think that at least for the space
that I operate in, Python really is sort of a sweet spot.
Python and Ruby don't kick me off the show.
- We're not judging, we're not judging.
(laughing)
I think that as a whole,
web development is something that needs to be
very accessible.
You need to be able to hire for it,
needs to be something that's maintainable over time.
And so I do think that there's kind of like a sweet spot
of like getting something started.
And a lot of times,
especially if it's your first iteration
of building something out,
Python is a much more accessible language
than trying to jump into something where you're maybe
over optimizing or over engineering
for something in the future.
Yeah, and I think Python just really shines
with web development and it's such a rich ecosystem
that why wouldn't you reach for it if you could?
- Why wouldn't you, right?
Yeah, and you have to hand off these projects
as being a consulting firm, right?
You build them and you probably hand them off
and I bet it feels more reasonable to hand off a Django
or a Flask app than it would be to some highly configured
ASP.NET type thing or a Java type of app that's,
you know, requires a bunch of steps,
even just to get the thing to run, you know?
- Yeah, absolutely.
Anything that's going to wind up being like
operating system restricted is really tricky.
And we've also been working with,
especially backend applications that require
a really complex ecosystem and architecture to deploy them.
And my goodness, like if you can't easily spin up
your local environment within, you know, five, 10 minutes,
you're probably doing something wrong.
And like all of these cloud infrastructures that exist
have their place, but a lot of times people really
want to grab onto those as well.
And it just, it complicates things.
So yeah, I definitely see why Python
is still shining in web development.
- For sure.
Brett, I'll give you the final word on this section.
And it's a two-part question.
One, educational purposes.
Python's a primary language there.
That's pretty interesting.
- Yeah, and it's fantastic.
I mean, way back when I started programming,
definitely, I didn't have Python.
I wish I did as an easier language to get tied into it.
But yeah, I mean, I definitely see it and I appreciate it.
And I wish I had convinced my professors
when I was in grad school to switch to Python
instead of some of their choices,
but luckily, Python still went out years later.
I've gone back and looked at all my previous schools
I attended all switched, so that's fantastic.
But yeah, and I hope it grows too, right?
Like Paul alluded to WebAssembly and such,
and I think we have some opportunity here
to make getting started for education,
as Emily also pointed out,
just getting up and going is a really important
friction point to lower,
So I'm hoping we can continue to improve that
to get us somewhere.
- Yeah.
Yeah, that was the part two of the two part question
is the WebAssembly stuff.
It's, I think traction is finally starting to take there
and that's post the time the survey was run,
but I think it is.
- Yeah.
And I just wanna tell us in two things here.
One, I love this question 'cause it's got the most,
I find odd specific point of programming of web parser,
scrapers and crawlers out of all the other options.
It always throws me every time I take this question.
It's like, why that specific line?
And I know it's historical
'cause what Python's been used for over the years,
but it's always so specific.
The other thing I look at this,
and this shows how weird my relationship with Python is,
I don't view this as Python for today.
I view it as what I wanted to see change
for Python tomorrow,
and specifically three, five, 10 years from now.
And so I hope we can move the education,
the desktop development,
and the embedded in mobile development more to--
on our screen, the left, but higher percentages.
Yeah, put them higher in that list, for sure.
Absolutely.
Yeah, great point.
OK, totally agree.
I believe Paul had something he wanted to bring up.
Paul, get in here.
Yeah, a quick point.
First, on the historical anomaly,
Brett, when you said that, I just
went back and looked at 2017.
And web crawlers was a big thing, man.
It was 32% back then.
So it is a little bit of an anomaly.
So I guess it still is.
What I'd like to call everyone's attention to
is look at data analysis.
The difference between the 52 and the 46,
it's gone down for people who identify to that.
If you go look at the two previous years,
it went down then as well.
Counterintuitive.
Yeah, it really is.
It must mean that the data analysis folks
have a lot of different languages to juggle.
All right, a bunch of other things that we could dive into.
Kind of touched on a bunch of these.
I think this is a really interesting question.
I've always enjoyed it.
And the question is,
do you consider yourself a data scientist?
And let's see, 66% say no.
29% say yes.
And then there's an other, and I'm not really sure.
If I looked at the results, I guess that makes sense,
but it sounds like a yes or no question,
but somewhere there's some uncertainty in there.
But when I describe the world as 1/3, 1/3, 1/3,
at least for the data science folks,
here's the 1/3.
I do think there's a very interesting trend
in the Python space where people who do data science,
they feel like they are more isolated in the minority
than say web developers and other folks.
Because I think you have a team of web developers
and often you have like one data scientist
at the company that's doing the processing
and analyzing and whatnot.
But if you look at the usage for Python,
the highest use, it's 50% is data analysis
and yet only 29% of the people say
they consider themselves data scientists.
So I think there's something interesting.
I think there's more data science happening in Python
than even the people in the trenches of that space of it
see it as.
- I think it gets even a bit weirder
because it's not that two thirds of everyone
who got asked here doesn't consider themselves
data scientists, but two thirds of all the people
that were asked, that stated that they work
in data analysis and machine learning
said they are not data scientists.
as it says there.
So that is something that throws me completely off here
because I don't know, maybe imposter syndrome,
but I don't know.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I think a lot of this goes to,
it kind of goes to what, yeah, no worries.
I think this kind of goes to what Jay was saying earlier.
Like when we look at data analysis
as these questions were asked,
that's not necessarily data science for a lot of people.
So Jay was talking about like using Python
to pull data from public APIs and do analysis on them.
Or like we use Python to run our accounting department.
Right?
Like we pulled together spreadsheets and do analysis
and budgeting and automatically generate invoices.
So I think that there's just like so much more
within that data analysis section
that just doesn't necessarily apply to data science.
- Right.
They're not doing machine learning with TensorFlow
and Jupyter.
So it might not feel like I'm a data scientist type.
Yeah.
Yeah, this is to me, this is an industry direction, you know, question of, you know, the industries that we work in are becoming more and more data focused, more and more data driven. And we've been saying that for a decade now. So I'm just going to keep the pattern going. But it seems like even in newer industries, even in industries that are popping up, like I think about how many people are social media influencers that have to deal
with things like impressions and stuff like that.
So it's like, yes,
you have high school kids and younger folks and
people who get it but I just don't.
They're having to look at data and they're having to think about
things from a data-driven perspective a lot earlier in life.
I think as it becomes more commonplace,
what we'll see is people will do
anything and everything to make their jobs easier.
And in fact, that was what originally got me into Python was, how do I make this job
easier?
Oh, I can script this out.
And I think we have some, I mean, I talked to high school kids, you know, from time to
time just about, you know, their careers in computer science in the future.
And a lot of them are thinking about everything that they do now from a data perspective.
And I think that's where you have more people doing data analytics that aren't necessarily
doing data science.
Yeah, that's a great perspective.
I'm very excited, especially for Brett and Emily on this one, this next question.
Python versions, Python 3 versus 2.
There was a little bit of uncertainty back in 2017.
25% of the people were still, "Nah, I'm doing Python 2."
it's just down to the ones I suspect you have no choice.
It's 95% Python 3.
Brett, can you do a celebration lap on this one?
- Oh yeah, I mean, I started to celebrate
when we got past 50% and the trend continued to go down.
I mean, I basically had on faith alone
and partially because this is somewhat my fault, right?
Like I did play a part in trying to make this all happen.
I kind of had to have faith
that this would all trend this way.
I feel sorry for the people,
those 5% that are still stuck on Python 2.
I know they're keeping--
- Well, you hear about some of the banks,
there's some of the banks that have
like 5,000 Python developers working on
some forked specialized version of Python 2
that has millions of lines of code.
I mean, that could be 3% right there.
- Yeah, and I mean, and I do know people
are still actively working on this, right?
like a friend of some of us, Jeff Triplett,
like I know part of his consulting work
is to help companies move from Python two to three.
So I know it's not that people aren't trying to do it.
My worry about those folk that can't move
is how much of an island will become to themselves
just because they'll slowly just be able to use
less and less of the open source stuff,
but not much we can do there.
But yes, I am very happy about this.
And at work, all of our stuff,
we dropped Python to support officially
beginning of this year.
So it was a nice day when that happened.
- Fantastic.
Emily, being on the inside,
what are your thoughts on this as well?
- Yeah, it's interesting.
'Cause I feel two very like conflicted feelings about this.
So my gut reaction when I look at this is like,
wow, like was it really 75% of people
who were already on it in 2017?
Like in my soul, I feel like there was still this big push
to like get people on Python 3
and it doesn't feel like we were that successful
that long ago.
So that's the first thing.
And then the other thing is like,
I just, I am lucky to function in a space
that we were so able to jump on Python 3
right from the beginning.
And I do kind of share a lot of Brett's concerns
and hesitations about, you know,
man, the people who are still on Python 2 right now
are probably really stuck on Python 2
and will be for the foreseeable future.
- Yeah, you're gonna have to leave that job
and go to a different place
where you no longer have to touch that software
to make that change, I'm sure.
- Yeah, that actually happened.
A company I was working for in 2019,
they were on Python 2.7, they're still on Python 2.7.
So unfortunately they're in that small percentage
that's used in Python 2.7, but yeah.
- For me, this graph represents a struggle
that I actually am still fighting
or was fighting until very recently
in OctoPrint's maintenance,
because OctoPrint is something that is deployed
at the end user space,
so I do not control the Python environment it is running in.
And so until the very latest stable version,
OctoPrint still supported Python 2 and 3.
And dropping Python 2 support was something that I dreaded
because I feared a huge backlash from the community
along the lines of,
"but then this and this plugin will no longer work
because the maintainer has not upgraded it yet
to support Python 3 as well."
And I'm currently looking at my own tracking stats
and for OctoPrint, the split is still 15% of all instances
are still on Python 2,
but at least we now have 85%.
So we are slowly catching up to these survey results,
but still the journey was long and hard.
And I'm really, really glad that I can finally now say,
no, I'm exclusively developing in Python 3.
f-strings, yes.
- Yes, yes, 3.6 is all you need.
That's where the magic is.
You got EaseTicker08 and you got f-strings.
- Yeah.
- I think that's an interesting microcosm
to think about how your app has these plugins.
And so there's that cascading dependency as well.
- Yeah, and it also means that if I make decisions
like dropping Python 2 support,
I pretty much nuke a whole part of my ecosystem.
And that is obviously bad because I depend on my ecosystem.
It makes up like,
it's one of the biggest selling points of the whole thing.
So yeah, that always was,
or stuff like this is always decisions
that are especially hard to make.
And yeah.
- Yeah.
- There's a Zed Shaw quote for everything.
And I wondered if there was a Zed Shaw quote for this.
Guess what?
There's a Zed Shaw quote.
November, 2016.
There's a high probability that Python 3
is such a failure it will kill Python.
So Brett, I mean, you killer.
- I'm okay with that.
Python 2 can go hang out with COBOL
in the back of the room and just live on forever,
well beyond all of us and do its thing
for the few that are stuck on it forever
and just can't do anything better.
- I am curious about that,
about that the box next to the graph here
about I'm saying, compared to Python 3,
Python 2 is more often applied to computer graphics,
games and mobile development.
I know for Mac--
Yeah, I'm curious about that as well.
Yeah, it was interesting. It kind of really stood out to me.
I know for Mac, right, they're dropping
Python 2.7 support, I believe,
which happened at the beginning of this year.
So yeah, that just was--
It's got to be embedded in something.
I can also kind of indirectly talk to this.
I have a friend who used to be in the gaming industry professionally.
Chats with him suggest the gaming industry is very
very much a
very very
very
The gaming industry is very slow to pick up on new stuff,
ironically, like cutting-edge graphics and all that,
but modern development practices and stuff,
extremely slow to switch.
I don't know if it's just culture or the velocity
of the tempo we do development at causes them to not stop
and look at how things change.
I think it's a combination of the embedding comment
just made plus just literally it works,
why make a change and we don't have time to move anything.
- I think Paul Hildebrandt talks about that
in Hollywood and video production, right?
- Yeah, Maya and all that switching over.
Yeah, I gave a talk at Disney for Paul at one point
to help him try to convince folks to move to Python 3
and they had to get the whole industry on board, right?
Like, 'cause there's a whole industry group
that controls-- control sounds a little extreme--
but works together to come up with standards of software
so that the whole industry works together.
And they, as a group, had to decide to move to Python 3.
And I think they did it a bit later
than some people might know.
And then that's what got Maya and all those graphics tools
to move over and all that.
And if you're still running older versions,
I'm sure you haven't switched.
So that's my guess as to why those specific areas are
kind of taking a bit longer to switch.
Yeah.
I totally agree with the game, computer graphics.
I'm not so sure about mobile because I don't even know what is happening there.
This game development point just kind of made me wonder.
A long time ago in a Galaxy Far, Far Away, I doubled briefly in Unity.
And back then, I think it didn't have Python bindings.
And I just checked.
Apparently, they introduced Python bindings in 2020
and they started with Python 2 in 2020.
So, and back then I currently have the blog post in front of me,
Python for Unity editor and where they said Python 3 support is in the works,
and that was on February 26th in 2020. So, I don't know if they have shipped it by now,
I sincerely hope so, but I mean that kind of explains why it might still be a factor in
games development, because if you started, for example, on a Unity game and developed everything
in Python 2, then why port it over? No one will look into the source anyhow because you
shipped the whole game binary and stuff like that.
Yep, very good. Very good point. Okay, let's move on to the next one. And this one I think
more than most, you got to keep in mind this is from the fall of 2021, and this is for Python 3,
what versions are you using? You know, you hear about a lot of libraries these days being 3.7 or
or above, I believe official support for 3.6
is no longer there, right, Emily?
It's now retired?
- Yep.
- Yeah, okay.
So it breaks down what percentage is being used.
So 3.5 or lower is only 2%, 3.6 is seven,
3.7 is 13, then it goes 27% and 35% for 3.9
and 16% for 3.10.
And so there's sort of this right side heavy,
normal distribution type of thing.
And I suspect it would move a little more to the right
with 310, you know, being seven months later
or something like that.
- Yeah, I think this really speaks a good.
- I was gonna say the timeframe, I think is really,
as you point out, Michael, really important to keep in mind
'cause in the fall, 310 would have been brand spanking new
'cause it comes out at the beginning of October
on the broadcast anniversary of Monty Python's Flying Circus.
So it's so new that if the community hadn't caught up yet
with releasing usually the extension modules
that everyone relies on, right,
that scientific stack and all that being ready to go,
that would probably hold that up.
So actually 16% is kind of nice
'cause it does show that at least some people
are ready to go day one versus everyone beyond three night,
which for the majority of the year that this survey covers
was the latest and greatest, right?
And talking about the Python 2 stuff,
I love this chart because for the longest time, right, Python 2 was up over here on
the left side and everything was slowly keeping up on the other side.
Now we're back to what would have been normal way back in my beginner days of Python of,
oh yeah, pretty much everyone just is on the newest version like three months, six months
later.
I can see Paul shaking his head remembering the same time as I do where the whole community
just moved together on the same versions versus the old split that we had where it's just
like, well, some people are moving, some aren't.
Kind of nice to be back on this cadence.
Not to fast forward any of your conversation, Mike, but I think that the point below it
also speaks to why a lot of people were on 3.9 at this point in time, which is how they're
installing it.
Oh, yeah.
If you're installing it from your OS provider or, you know, some other form, you're going
to get an older version of Python.
And if you're learning Python, which just from surveys that I've seen from Python communities,
the largest member of Python communities are often students and people wanting to learn.
So how do they install Python?
Well, if it's already there, they're just going to use what's there.
If they don't, then they're probably going to go to the website and download it and then
and just run the installer.
I think that we as Python professionals like to think that the way that we do things is
normal or normalized, I guess, but often not.
Me using, you know, ASDF to manage all of my different Python versions that I'm using
back and forth is very much the outlier.
So I feel like 3.9 is the largest in this case because teachers are telling their students,
here, install this, do this thing, and if that's what they're using and that's what
they're, you know, being forced to use, then they're just going to tell their students
to do the same thing.
Yeah, the other thing is, if you, the main way you get Python here, that people got Python
is by downloading the installer.
If you do that, it does an auto update, right?
And so if you did that a year and a half ago, you're just going to have that, "Oh, I have
Python 3, I'm good."
There's no auto update, whereas if you did brew install,
it'll say, oh, there's a new version.
And you just generally just accept whatever the updates are.
So I think that actually has a big influence here as well.
And then, Brett, to your point,
I remember right as 3.10 came out,
there was a few things I wanted
that didn't have wheels for 3.10
that also had to be on M1.
There was like, there were certain libraries that didn't,
it's not that they didn't support it,
they weren't quite ready to deliver you
the stuff you actually needed to use it.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Tanya, Paul, Jay, you all are talking to customers
and working with folks.
Does this influence how you might think
of working with people or presenting stuff
like tutorials or things along those lines?
- Yeah, I think so.
depend on like, you know, which level they're at, and like,
what operating system that they're using, maybe. I know,
for myself, like, I just, I literally, like, just started
using pyemp. Just makes it a lot easier to, like, also switch
between, you know, different Python versions. But yeah, I
think this is definitely something to think about, like,
when we're writing content. Yeah, for sure.
For sure.
I may have been told once or twice to not lean on the wall
and some of my match case operators as much.
But you do have to think about how you're writing code
and some of the benefits.
And I think that's, I know 3.11 isn't on here
for obvious reasons, but that's one of the things
that we think about when we talk about what's happening
in the future too, is yes, it's great to be able
to extol the virtues of all the efficiency improvements.
But at the same time, we have to also understand
that we might be talking to someone that says,
yeah, yeah, yeah, that's great.
We're not going to touch 3.11 for another three years.
So it--
- It works, we're not touching it.
- Yeah, it's fun to encourage that conversation,
but also to remember that not every blog post
can have the latest and greatest features included.
- Yeah, for sure.
Three quick points from me.
First, Emily's first contribution to CPython was Walrus.
So you will address Walrus with love and respect.
- I love the Walrus operator.
I for one, read forward every time I can in my personal code
however.
- Second, I find myself blocked sometimes by,
of all things has black gotten to it yet,
which is kind of funny.
And third, I believe all these problems we solved
when Brett adds install Python
to the Python launcher feature set.
I think that we'll all be in good shape when that happens.
I'm curious, Emily, I wanna put you on the spot,
make a prediction, 310,
what's its number gonna be next time?
Think it'll hit 35%?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- All right.
- Because I think what we're seeing here,
least to a certain extent, is that we haven't inflicted too much trauma on the community
that they've said, "No, I finally got to Python 3.6 or 3.5," or wherever they were at when
they migrated over, and that they wanted to kind of like stay there.
And I think that the core team takes great care, especially now, to not introduce any
any sort of deprecations or breaking changes that are going to impact the majority of users.
Because we know, like we have this talk internally all the time, that like there is not going
to be a Python 4 because we don't want to see that sort of transition that we saw from
2 to 3. And so I'm hoping that in a way we've broken that stigma that a Python upgrade is
a pain. And I don't think I was really around to see the better days before we introduced
that. But I do think at this point, there's much lower friction and much better tooling
for somebody to say, "Hey, you know, yeah, like Python 3.10 just came out. Let's upgrade
our Docker container. Let's run CI. Let's see if our tests pass and like, we should
be good to go." And just kind of like more readily upgrade on a regular basis. Because
we look at these more as incremental changes, one. And two, I think there is, there's a
a lot of cool new features that go into each release
that people want to grab for.
And I think that will drive people to continue to upgrade
as much as they possibly can.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I do think it's been a very smooth ride from 3.5 onward.
I can't think of anything that's been a problem.
So people are encouraged to keep going.
I do think there's two things.
One, I love the Wallrace operator as well,
although I've taken down my website with it on accident
because there were some utility scripts
that were not loaded by the website that I thought,
oh, I can put my newer code over here.
And it was three, seven on the server,
but the server, the web framework scans all the files
to try to find routes, URLs, even if you don't call it
and it didn't work so well.
But I also love it.
I think the other thing is there's gonna be
an interesting blip in this graph over time
from going, 'cause it goes three eight, three nine,
then three 10, and it's sort of this curve
of what you expect, like a normal-ish distribution.
I think the performance that's coming in 3.11
is gonna make a lot of people say,
no, no, no, it's time to be cutting edge.
We're going to get such a boost from it
that we're willing to jump not just to 3.10, but to 3.11.
I was trying to pull up the graph here for us.
Yeah, there's some amazing numbers for that.
Maybe the core devs on the team
wanna speak real quick to this,
but there was Eduardo pointed out,
there's this article, maybe you all have seen it.
This says the Python 3.11 performance benchmarks
are looking fantastic.
And it's kind of hard to navigate this thing.
But if you cruise through here,
you see some really meaningful performance improvements,
like 40% for certain use cases and so on.
So, you know, Brett and Emily, what do you think about this?
More people kind of jumping over 3.10
to get to this faster Python.
- So I think in general, you're right.
I think when 3.11 comes out and people start talking
about how they're getting like bare minimum 5%
and in certain benchmarks, 60%,
which averages out probably roughly to 20% for most people.
I think that's going to cause a lot of people to perk up and go, "Yeah, we should jump."
Now, having said that, there is the potential for compatibility concerns
because so much of the internals have had to be uprooted and changed
that if you're, depending on an extension module,
there's some really deep mucking around with CPython internals.
They might have to spend some time still to get updated.
so there might also be some cohort of users
that get held up because of that.
But yeah, I suspect most people are not in that group,
and so they will be able to jump straight over
and people are gonna go, "Oh, wow, this is so much faster."
For literally just business reasons alone
of just literally saving on your compute costs,
let's switch to 311.
Like, I think this is gonna be one of those,
you can go to management and convince them
that you update your code
because the amount of money you're gonna save on your cost
is going to be high enough that it's worth putting the time and effort in.
Versus the other times where it's the engineers coming to management going,
I want the wall or so afraid. Why will you let me have this? Right.
And they all like, well, it's not worth it. Just keep doing it.
Whereas now like we can save 20% off our compute costs. Oh, okay. Yeah.
Let's go ahead and do this. Right. So.
Yep, exactly.
Everyone will eventually get Emily's walrus operator, hell or high water.
And meanwhile, I'll, I'll,
I'll probably for all eternity of OctoPrince development will be stuck on
whatever is the latest that is still supported kind of thing
or the oldest.
- Right, right.
So 3.7, yep.
- Yeah, so currently I'm still stuck on,
stuck, I mean, I'm happy I'm finally on 3.7
and not on 2.7, but I hear Walrus operator
and I hear matching and pattern matching
and I hear all this stuff and this looks so amazing
and I would love to play around with it,
but maybe in five years or so, I don't know.
For now it's like, yeah.
If you have to support something that people install
on their OS provider's Python,
then you are, yeah, a bit out of luck.
- Absolutely, very interesting angle there
that you're constrained by.
All right, I wanna just, we only have time for one more.
I want to, oh my gosh.
I wanna find out how long people, two things actually.
Let's just, I think since we have two,
a representative for V2 major.
(laughing)
Editors, let's real quick,
maybe Brett and Paul give us your thoughts on
if I'm going to use,
I'm gonna write some code,
you know, what editor do I use, right?
It's VS Code and PyCharm,
pretty close neck and neck,
and then it just tails off
to some insane long tail after that.
I mean, honestly, this must make both of you pretty happy
that playing such an important role up front.
- Yeah, especially, I mean, PyCharm's been up there
from the get-go, the start of this survey,
and us little spunky folk over at VS Code
have finally caught up to PyCharm,
'cause if you go back to 2017--
- You and all your extensions, that's what it is.
- 'Cause if you go back to 2017,
when this was actually added,
we were sixth or seventh on that list.
So we're fairly lucky that the community has decided
that we are worthy as it were to be up there with PyCharm.
So yeah.
- Yeah, awesome.
- I think one of the, an interesting story for this
is just smart editing in general.
When we're just looking at the distribution
of Python releases for me, I think it's 78% is 3.8 or higher
which is great news for me
because I like the typing convenience,
type hinting conveniences that started to appear
in 3.8 and after.
And it's just a wonderful surprise to me
that the PyCharm community or Python community values
typing and values tooling that puts that to work
to help you write better code.
So for when I look at this, I see this to a degree
as a demand for smart tooling, smart editing.
- Yeah, and I think that's a really good point
that not only, I think it's two signals.
It's one, the community, as Paul said,
picking up on typing and smart tooling, I wanna do that,
but also the tool makers,
I'm speaking for myself,
realizing that the Python community is big enough
and important enough to invest in it, right?
Because there's always been a conflict of,
oh, smart tooling for Python's hard,
but I don't wanna do it, right?
which is honestly kind of good in a weird way
'cause it led to us having such a good tradition
of documentation, right?
And people care so much about that.
I mean, like I know what Michael and Paul have done
around Mist and then their tutorials and that coming up
and being a thing and was continuously caring
about our documentation tooling and all that.
But it's also, I think just a showing of,
yeah, just where we've all come from all directions,
both from a support perspective, the community perspective,
and just getting to the point where this,
everyone views this as totally reasonable and possible
and something people can totally rely on and push on.
And the community going along with it and going like,
yeah, this is fantastic.
We now have the equivalent tooling, more or less,
of other languages, isn't this fantastic?
Versus, oh, I don't wanna use Python
'cause I don't get auto-complete, right?
'Cause I know that used to be a big complaint
I used to get, which is, once again,
the history of us pushing for good documentation,
good names and caring and all that stuff and API design.
So I think, ironically, not having this
at the start of the community,
back in the '90s and early 2000s,
actually has become a benefit long-term
because we have good practices that have now paid tenfold
because good practices plus tooling now
versus we'll just lean on the tooling
and who cares what the name is
because everyone's just going to hit dot anyway
and just choose the first answer.
- Mike, you know, I appreciate both of these.
- Yeah, go ahead, Jay.
- You know you can't bring me on the show
without knowing I'm going to troll a little bit.
So I just want to point out that the Vim/VimMode users
are winning in the war between Vim and Emacs.
- Yeah, it's three to one.
Yeah, the Notepad++ folks, they're out there too.
But excellent, all right, well,
we are getting a little bit long on time
for everyone on the show's time.
I could sit here and talk for hours about this.
This is such a great panel to be here
and talking with you all about it.
It's been super fascinating.
So maybe we just close this out with,
if you have any thoughts on where Python
just recently come from and where it's going.
I'll start it off with just WebAssembly, PyScript,
very exciting new Py slice of where Python might show up
and make big impacts.
So thank you to everyone who's done that in particular,
Brett, and I know Paul,
you're working on PyScript stuff as well.
Yeah, any thoughts?
- Do you mind if I just start my quick?
- Yeah.
(laughs)
I'll just say, I just hope the community continues
to be as fantastic and wonderful as it is.
I'm sure Emily and anyone else who got to be
at PyCon in person this year got to relive that experience
after a two year hiatus and got to see it still alive
and thriving.
And I mean, I've said this before,
I'll just say I came for the language,
but I did it for the community
and I continue to stay for the community, right?
Like I literally just got a career conversation
with my manager last month and I opened with saying,
the reason I'm here and the passion I hold
is for this community.
It's not even specifically for the language anymore.
Language is the enabler to allow me to help bring more wonderful people to this
community and to help others get to enjoy and benefit from this community.
And I hope that's the future is this community needs to thrive and grow and
be an open welcoming place for everyone who needs that place in their lives.
I just want to say seven years.
It took me seven years to go from, Hey, this Python thing looks cool.
I would love to work with this in my day to day.
to now I'm in a job where my focus is working on Python.
And I don't think that,
part of that is just me being persistent and ornery,
I guess, but then like the other part of that
is the fact that the community continues to grow,
the resources continue to grow.
I feel Emily's pain with working with Ruby.
My first programming language was learning Ruby.
And the thing that made me switch from Ruby to Python
was that community.
So, you know, we have a couple of PSF folks
and core maintainers here.
You know, thank you for making the language what it is,
but also thank you for making the community what it is.
Because without it, I don't think I would be
in the role that I'm at today.
- I would like to just hook into this as well,
because I went to my very first German PyCon in 2018.
I felt utterly out of my space.
I had large imposter syndrome,
because who was I?
I was this service project maintainer
who had actually self-taught herself Python
'cause she developed a project in that.
And now I had the courage to go to a PyCon
and I sat there and people just started talking to me
and I had all very nice chats.
And actually the next PyCon, I held my first talk at one.
So I can't say that I have ever felt so welcome
in the community ever before than in the Python community.
So thank you very much for that.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
- That's awesome.
Yeah, that seems to be a common trend on our talk today.
So yeah, I actually started out programming with Java.
Then I moved to Ruby, like some other people here did.
And then I just wasn't,
I didn't feel like the community was as supportive.
And then when I moved to Python,
it was just like, you know, light bulb came on
and the community has been absolutely amazing.
So thank you to everyone who is supporting me
in the community.
Thank you to our core developers as well.
I'm definitely excited to see, of course, where PyScript goes
and also to see where some of the other types of things
go, like mobile development and game development as well.
Totally.
All right.
Well, I'm looking at all you here on the screen
and just realizing what a great community it is,
what awesome contributions you all have made.
So thank you for being on the show.
Thank you for reflecting on the survey
and the state of the community with me.
It's been great to have you here.
See you all later.
- Thanks, Michael.
- Thank you.
- Yep, bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]